	The Official Language Problem
	Jonathan Pool

	WARNING: This file exists for the sole purpose of exposing the
content of the associated PDF page-image document
(http://panlex.org/pubs/etc/offlangprob-apsr1991.pdf) to search
engines. The text in this file is not entirely accurate and omits or
misrepresents formulas, graphs, footnotes, etc.

	Abstract Polities and organizations use and require particular
languages for official business.  The choice of official languages is a
vexing issue.  Theorists, convinced that a fair language policy cannot
be efficient, have despaired of an elegant solution. To investigate this
apparent dilemma, I mathematically model the problem of choosing an
efficient and fair language policy for a plurilingual polity.  The
policy designates official languages, and it taxes the language groups
to pay for translation among the official languages. Contrary to
prevailing wisdom, this model implies that a fair language policy can be
efficient.  But what if language groups rationally misrepresent the
costs of using a non-native official language?  Even then, the
policymaker can discover a fair language policy and, under some
conditions, can use a cost-revelation procedure that discovers a fair
and efficient language policy.  The results challenge the claim that
efficiency and practicality excuse the inferior treatment of language
minorities.

	Introduction In a world with thousands of languages, the choice of
official languages is a natural political issue.  When governments,
firms, associations, and international organizations designate the
languages that they require or permit to be used in official business,
interests come into conflict.  Those whose languages are not official
spend years learning others' languages and may still communicate with
difficulty, compete unequally for employment and participation, and
suffer from "minority" or "peripheral" status. The issue of official
languages has often been described as one that resists peaceful, stable,
or satisfying resolution.  Possible explanations include the primordial,
symbolic, divisive, uncompromisable character of language conflict
(Rustow 1970); inherent incompatibilities between linguistic communities
(Deutsch 1984; Laponce 1984); the reluctance of linguistic majorities to
concede rights to minorities (Sniderman, Fletcher, Russell, and Tetlock
1989); the power of civil servants to protect their linguistic
privileges (Laitin 1989; Mackey 1977); the important material and
symbolic consequences of language policies (Weinstein 1983); and the
difficulty of predicting these consequences (Fishman 1974, 92-94; Kelman
1971).  As an example of this last claim, Laponce (1989) hypothesizes
that, if a government tries to fortify a language by making it official
where it is weak, this act may backfire by drawing speakers away from
the language's heartland, threatening the language's very survival.  For
these or other reasons, the choice of official languages is described in
case after case as a frustrating one (e.g., Andronov 1975; Beer and
Jacob 1985; Brass 1974; Coulmas 1985, 113-47; Das Gupta 1970; DeFrancis
1977; Fishman 1986; Haugen 1966; King 1977; Laitin 1977; McRae 1986;
Muñiz-Argüelles 1989; Noss 1967; O'Barr and O'Barr 1976; Ostrower 1965;
Polomé 1968; Pool 1978; Rabushka and Shepsle 1972; Rubango 1986;
Schiffman 1987; Tabory 1980; Tollefson 1986; Weinstein 1990; Whiteley
1974; Wurm 1974; Young 1976, 367-72). Beyond the foregoing reasons,
students of political and sociolinguistic theory may themselves deserve
some blame for the recurring eruption of disputes over official
languages.  Theorists have failed to provide models for optimally
resolving this issue.  In fact, the theory of official languages echoes
with pessimism as to whether any elegant solution could exist.  A
solution that treats all speakers of all languages identically is
considered impractical.  According to Kloss (1966, 7), "Three seems to
be the maximum number of languages which can be placed on an equal
footing as official languages of the nation.  The day-to-day affairs of
a country's administration and even its legislative proceedings will
soon be overtaxed, tangled, and inefficient if transacted in more than
three languages."  Avrorin (1975, 205), De_eriev (1977, 259), and
Guboglo (1979, 193) claim it would be "unnatural", "inefficient",
"impossible", "impractical", and contrary to "common sense" for
governments to provide teachers and textbooks, even throughout
elementary school, in all pupils' languages.  Van Dyke (1976, 5-6) says
governments have "no other practical choice" but to give different
statuses to different languages; the idea "that claims for equal
treatment in terms of language need to be balanced off against costs is
a principle that all accept."  Green (1987), though arguing against any
system of official languages that would diminish anyone's welfare, still
assents to the officialization of the most powerful groups' languages. 
De Witte (1989, 97), while insisting that equality under the law would
require governments to "use as many languages as are spoken by the
target public", says services may be denied in some languages "on the
basis of administrative or judicial efficiency.  It is clear, for
example, that a single user cannot demand an additional official
language, but a group consisting of about half the population can
legitimately do so."  Mazrui (1976, 473-79) proposes 5 official "world
languages", selected as a compromise among several principles, including
"the sheer exigencies of power". Without a theoretical account of what
an ideally democratic language policy would look like, it is no surprise
that legislatures, courts, and regulators employ ad-hoc numerical, cost,
and political criteria when allocating official statuses to languages
(Anderson and Silver 1984; Falch 1973).  Examples include guarantees of
minority-language schools where "a considerable proportion of Polish
nationals of other than Polish speech are resident" (Laqueur and Rubin
1979, 154-55), government services in both English and French where
there is a "significant demand" (Canada, Commissioner of Official
Languages 1989, 34), public notices in the language of any nationality
constituting at least 30% of a jurisdiction (Falch 1973, 89-90),
emergency telephone operator service in languages spoken by at least 5%
of a local population (Rubin 1984, 162), and voting instructions in
languages of poorly educated groups constituting at least 5% of a state
or local population (42 U.S.C. Sec. 1973aa-1a).  United States Supreme
Court Justices Burger and Blackmun agreed that 1,800 children had a
right to recognition of their language by a public school district, but
said they might reject a similar claim "when, in another case, we are
concerned with a very few youngsters, or with just a single child" (Lau
v. Nichols 1974, 572). Although the intrinsic inelegance of the official
language problem is variously described, most theorists appear to have
concluded that the choice of official languages involves an inevitable
compromise between efficiency and fairness.  It is usually claimed that
an efficient language policy officializes fewer than all languages and
is therefore unfair, while a fair policy officializes everyone's
language or an entirely alien language and is therefore inefficient. 
Efficient neutrality, exemplified in church-state separation and racial
nondiscrimination, is held inapplicable to language groups, because
governments can simply ignore races and religions, but must use and thus
choose languages. A principled solution to the official language problem
seems to be further inhibited by the large number of norms that
theorists (e.g., Fishman 1973, 63-71; Pool 1976; Thorburn 1971;
Vaillancourt 1983; Vikör 1988, 96-138; Woolard 1989) acknowledge in
addition to efficiency and fairness.  These include authenticity
(favoring indigenous languages), uniformity (favoring only 1 language),
diversity (favoring multiple languages), distinctiveness (favoring
languages unique to the community), universality (favoring languages
known by outsiders), stability (favoring existing language rights and
statuses), radicality (using language policy to liberate oppressed
groups), definitiveness (avoiding linguistic options), liberty
(noncoercion), modernization (favoring languages with developed lexicons
and literatures), populism (favoring mass over elite languages),
prestige (recognizing already high-status languages), anti-bossism
(discouraging powerful linguistic intermediaries), and tolerability
(avoiding policies that would induce emigration or secession). A few
voices have suggested that efficiency and fairness in a policy on
official languages can be reconciled, but their ideas remain to be
explored.  Among the proposed solutions are voluntarism (Isaev 1977,
21-23, 337-38, 351), compensation (Pool 1987), democratization (O'Barr
1976, 19), and even linguicide-the obliteration of all native languages
except a single official language (Atkins 1978).  Each of these ideas,
even if superficially plausible, is problematic, and no one has yet
rigorously defined and analyzed any of them. The prevailing belief that
an efficiency-fairness conflict in official language policy exists, and
that it justifies evidently unfair policies, merits scrutiny.  In a
world that largely embraces democratic norms, one might expect defenses
of unfair policies to be held to a high standard of proof, particularly
when, as in this arena, the policies substantially affect the lives of
billions of persons.  Nevertheless, the case for allowing official
language policies to be unfair has been made with the support of only
impressionistic arguments. In this article I show that fairness is
compatible with efficiency in a policy on official languages.  In the
next section I present a formal model of the official language problem. 
The model defines policy alternatives, their consequences, and normative
principles that one might wish to satisfy in choosing a language policy.
 In the section after that, I prove that there are language policies
simultaneously satisfying the fairness and efficiency principles, and
that procedures exist by which one can discover such policies, even when
the affected groups have private information about the policy
consequences and are motivated to conceal that information from the
policymaking authorities.  In the concluding section, I summarize the
results, discuss their robustness, and suggest possible elaborations of
my model. Model What, in essence, is the official language problem? 
Abstracting from the intricate complexity and variety of practical
language politics, I here define the official language problem as a set
of language policy choices that have particular consequences and that
are subject to particular normative criteria.  These choices,
consequences, and criteria are expressed in a model consisting of 10
formal assumptions, which I elucidate with accompanying "motivations".
ASSUMPTION 1.	A polity is partitioned into 2 or more groups, each
with a positive size and a different native language, drawn from a
finite set of languages. Motivation:  This assumption reflects the fact
that almost all persons can be described as having 1 native or first
language.  For simplicity, I assume no one is natively plurilingual. 
Each group can be understood as the set of citizens sharing some native
language, with the group size being proportional to the number of
citizens in it.  The assumptions below don't introduce any within-group
differences.  Accordingly, I shall not analytically disaggregate the
groups into individuals in this model. ASSUMPTION 2.	At least 1
language is official. Motivation:  Each state or other organization
generally officializes at least 1 language, if not de jure then de
facto.  Assumption 2 allows languages that aren't native to any group in
the polity to be official, reflecting the fact that foreign, artificial,
classical, and pidgin languages are sometimes given official status. 
While various kinds and degrees of official status are granted to
languages in practice, I simplify by assuming only that every language
is either official or not. ASSUMPTION 3.	For each group whose native
language is not official, each official language has a positive adoption
price that depends only on the group and the language. Motivation: 
Typically, persons whose native languages are not official adopt some
official language for use in communicating with the rest of the polity. 
The cost of adopting an official language might consist of time, effort,
and money spent in learning the language; deprivations caused by
imperfect command of the language; and the loss of prestige arising from
the denial of official status to one's native language.  All such
effects can be viewed as an aggregated price for adopting a particular
official language.  I assume the adoption price of a particular official
language for a particular group doesn't change when any other language
is officialized or deofficialized.  Thus, the adoption price of official
language I for group J is not affected by whether language K, too, is
official. ASSUMPTION 4.	The adoption cost of each group is 0 if its
native language is official and otherwise is the minimum of the adoption
prices of all official languages for the group. Motivation:  If a
group's own language is official, it typically uses that language and
incurs no cost in adapting to an official language.  Otherwise, it would
be reasonable to expect the group to choose the official language that
is least costly for the group. ASSUMPTION 5.	The translation cost of
each group is the product of the group's size and 1 less than the number
of official languages. Motivation:  Suppose each group knows and uses
only 1 official language.  Suppose, further, there are no superfluous
official languages, i.e. official languages that no group uses. 
Suppose, finally, the polity is participatorily egalitarian:  each
citizen communicates to the same extent, or, in terms of assumption 1,
the volume of each group's public utterances is proportional to the
group's size.  Under these conditions, how can all groups understand one
another?  Each public utterance of any group must be translated into
each of the official languages other than the one in which it is
uttered.  Thus, if o is the number of official languages, it must be
translated o - 1 times.  And what does it cost to translate all the
public utterances of a group?  Presumably, the cost is proportional to
the volume of those utterances and hence to the group's size, and also
proportional to the number of times they are translated (o - 1).  The
cost then equals some constant multiplied by group size and o - 1. 
Assumption 5 adopts a measurement scale that makes this constant 1.
ASSUMPTION 6.	The total cost is the sum of the groups' adoption costs
and translation costs. Motivation:  For any set of official languages,
any group has an adoption cost and a translation cost.  The total of all
these costs for all groups is the total cost that a set of official
languages imposes on the polity. ASSUMPTION 7.	The tax schedule is a
set of taxes on the groups, the sum of the taxes being equal to the sum
of the translation costs. Motivation:  Suppose the state performs the
translation and does nothing else.  Then it might tax the groups to pay
for the translation.  In covering its cost, the state might also
redistribute wealth by taxing the groups disproportionally to their
sizes.  Tax rates sometimes in fact differ among language groups.  The
differences may be byproducts of transfers to poorer groups or regions
(e.g., in Yugoslavia and Canada) and wealth-based assessments (e.g., in
the United Nations), or may reflect an overtly language-based subsidy,
such as what the Swiss government pays to the Romansh- and
Italian-speaking regions (McRae 1983, 169-72). ASSUMPTION 8.	The
language policy is the set of official languages and the tax schedule. 
A language regime is a rule producing a language policy.  A language
regime is based on a set of facts if it does not refer to any facts not
in the set. Motivation:  Both a set of official languages and a tax
schedule which may tax the native speakers of different languages at
different rates can be regarded as ingredients of a language policy. 
The language policy may be determined by some rule, such as a
constitutional provision.  Such a rule would be a function:  facts (such
as the number and sizes of the groups) would be input, and a language
policy would be output.  I call such a rule a "language regime".
ASSUMPTION 9.	A language policy is efficient if it minimizes the
total cost.   A group's burden is the sum of its adoption cost and its
tax.  A language policy is fair if each group's burden is proportional
to the group's size. Motivation:  Since this model provides a measure of
total social cost, and since assumption 5 guarantees that the total
social benefit (communicability) will be constant regardless of the
language policy that is chosen, a reasonable notion of efficiency for
this model is the minimization of the total cost.  As for fairness, any
language policy imposes an adoption cost and a tax on each group; I call
their sum the group's "burden".  Suppose each group's burden is shared
uniformly by its members.  Then individualistic fairness would require
that each group's burden be proportional to the group's size. ASSUMPTION
10.	A language regime is objective if it is based on the number of
groups, their sizes, and their native languages, and semiobjective if
based on these and on groups' choices. Motivation:  If one wants an
efficient and fair language policy, it is reasonable to want a language
regime-a rule-that guarantees such a policy.  A language regime based on
the number of groups, their sizes, and their native languages is
especially appealing.  The reason is that these facts are relatively
easy to measure.  Excluded from this set of facts are adoption prices. 
As discussed after assumption 3, adoption prices may include subjective
as well as observable elements.  If a language regime measured adoption
prices by asking groups to disclose them, the replies might be false. 
Groups might want to mislead the language regime into officializing
their native languages and/or lowering their taxes.  This problem is an
instance of the general principle that telling the truth is not always
rational if a policy that affects the teller is going to be based on the
teller's disclosure (cf. Dasgupta, Hammond, and Maskin 1979; Radner
1986; Rasmusen 1989, 133-36, 172-75).  Accordingly, I define a language
regime as objective if it doesn't require as an input any adoption
price.  But what if we can't guarantee an efficient and fair language
policy without considering adoption prices?  Then we might seek to
induce the groups to make choices that will reveal adoption prices.  I
call a language regime that relies on such choices semiobjective.  The
language regime can use such choices to infer adoption prices, but its
inferences may be incorrect. Results, Proofs, and Discussion Under the
foregoing model, can a language policy be efficient and fair?  If so, is
there an objective way to produce such a policy?  I shall present 6
results, followed by their proofs and discussions.  Readers wishing to
skip the proofs can do so without loss of continuity. RESULT 1.	An
efficient language policy always exists. PROOF:  For any polity, each
language policy has a total cost.  Some language policy's total cost is
the smallest.  Any language policy with this total cost (at least 1 must
have it) is efficient. RESULT 2.	A fair language policy always
exists. PROOF:  Consider a language policy with all groups' native
languages official and each group's tax equal to the group's own
translation cost.  Assumption 7 requires that the sum of the taxes be
the sum of the translation costs, and this is the case for this language
policy.  Because each group's native language is official, each group's
adoption cost is 0.  Thus, each group's burden is its tax.  By
assumption 5, translation costs are proportional to size, so with this
policy taxes are proportional to size, and thus burdens are proportional
to size.  By assumption 9, that makes this policy fair. DISCUSSION: 
Results 1 and 2 are consistent with previous commentaries, which
generally imply that a language policy can be efficient or fair.  The
consensus denies, however, that it can be both efficient and fair.
RESULT 3.	An efficient, fair language policy always exists. PROOF: 
We can take any efficient language policy (at least 1 always exists by
result 1) and make it fair by changing its tax schedule.  A changed tax
schedule will leave the total cost unchanged, so the new language policy
will remain efficient, while now also being fair.  For the new tax
schedule, I shall identify the groups as group 1, group 2, ..., and
shall use this notation: o	the number of official languages;
si	the size of group i; ai	the adoption cost of group i; ti	the
translation cost of group i; xi	the tax on group i. I shall use s, a,
t, and x for the respective whole-polity sums, and we know from
assumption 7 that .  Assumption 5 says .  Summing the equations for all
ti, we get the total translation cost: To make a language policy fair,
we must change its tax schedule so each group's burden is proportional
to its size.  Each group's burden must then bear the same ratio to the
total burden as the group's size bears to the total size.  By assumption
9, group i's burden is ai + xi, so Solving equation 2 for xi, we find
that each group's tax is DISCUSSION:  Efficiency and fairness, as
defined here, are compatible because they constrain different things. 
Efficiency requires minimizing the total cost, and the total cost
depends solely on the set of official languages.  Fairness requires
proportional burdens, and this can be achieved with an appropriate tax
schedule, regardless of the set of official languages. Result 3
challenges the common claim that efficiency justifies the unequal
treatment of different languages' speakers.  In this model efficiency is
no barrier to fairness.  The purported efficiency-fairness conflict
results from certain (usually unstated) assumptions.  It fails to arise
under my assumptions. Table 1.  Alternative fair language policiesa for
several countries Country Languages and native speakers (%) Belgium
A:Dutch	59 B:French	33 C:German	1 Canada A:English	60
B:French	24 India A:Bengali	8 B:Hindi	28 C:Marthi	8
D:Tamil	7 E:Telugu	8 Peru A:Quechua	27 B:Spanish	68
Philippines A:Cebuano	24 B:Hiligaynon	10 C:Ilocano	11
D:Pilipino	24 South Africa A:Afrikaans	16 B:Xhosa	18
C:Zulu	21 USSR A:Russian	59 B:Ukrainian	13 C:Uzbek	5 USA
(1990) A:English	89 B:Spanish	6 USA (2080) A:English	74
B:Spanish	21 Sources:  Britannica Book of the Year (1990, 762-67,
774-77), Spencer (1986, 1, 10), Strategy Research Corporation (1987,
176).  USA forecasts for 2080 assume Hispanics' current language
composition and Puerto Rico statehood. Main assumptions:  translation
costs 1% of total income per target language; nonnative speakers learn 1
official language at cost of 5% of total income. 1st alternative for
each country is "efficient", 2nd is "inefficient". As % of total income.
 "( )" = negative tax. Native speakers of any official language. For
examples of how the model can prescribe an efficient and fair language
policy, imagine these "facts" about a polity:  (1) each person's
lifetime earning potential (which will be the unit of value) is equal;
(2) each person spends 1% of a working life using an official language
to communicate to the polity; (3) a translator spends the same time
translating an utterance as it took to utter; (4) a person whose native
language is not official spends 5% of a working life (2 out of 40 years)
learning an official language; (5) its members' learning time
constitutes a group's adoption cost. On these "facts", efficiency would
require officializing the largest native language, and also any other
language natively spoken by more than 20% of the population.  If we let
l be the native speakers of official languages as a proportion of the
population, the fair per-capita tax would be  on official language
speakers and  on others.  The 3 terms imply that the tax would (1) vary
directly with the number of official languages, (2) vary inversely with
the fraction of the population not natively speaking an official
language, and (3) exactly compensate those who must learn an official
language.  Official languages and per-capita taxes would be insensitive
to polity size.  Table 1 compares, for several countries, 2 fair
language policies, the efficient one and a plausible but inefficient
one, assuming "facts" 1-5.  Note that because the taxes are fair all
persons-even those whose native languages lose official status-prefer
the efficient policy to the inefficient one.  The German-speaking
Belgians' case in table 1 will illustrate this principle.  Belgium's
native German speakers pay a negative tax (receive a subsidy) of 3.61%
of their income if only Dutch (A) and French (B) are official, but pay a
tax of 2.34% of their income if all 3 languages are official.  The
difference is 5.95% of their income.  But it costs them only 5% of their
income to learn Dutch or French.  So, they prefer the policy that
officializes only Dutch and French. Anyone familiar with any of table
1's cases will recognize serious complications in the politics of
official languages that are ignored in the model and hence in results
1-3.  For example, language groups tend to be (as in Belgium)
geographically concentrated, making regional officialization policies
(as in Belgium) plausible.  There are many other complications, such as
intergenerational assimilation, variable translation cost rates, and
variable participation, that await more elaborate models, as I shall
discuss in the conclusion. In excluding most such complications from
this model, I am not diminishing their importance.  It is precisely
because each is important enough (and probably tricky enough) to deserve
a detailed study of its own that I exclude them here. In the remainder
of this section I shall, however, select a single important complication
for analysis:  cost measurement.  I have shown that an efficient and
fair language policy exists, but I have not shown that we can find it. 
One obstacle, mentioned above in my "motivation" for assumption 10, is
the subjectivity of adoption prices.  The language regime described for
result 3 is based in part on adoption prices.  Suppose we refuse to
posit adoption prices, such as those posited by "facts" 4 and 5 in the
example.  Suppose, further, we refuse to assume that groups will
sincerely reveal adoption prices when asked.  Can we design a language
regime that infallibly produces an efficient, fair language policy
objectively, namely without information about adoption prices? RESULT
4.	At least 1 objective language regime always produces a fair
language policy. PROOF:  In proving result 2, I described a language
regime that always produces a fair language policy:  "make all groups'
languages official and make each group's tax equal to its translation
cost".  With n groups, group i's tax is then .  Thus, the language
regime is based only on the number of groups (n), their sizes (si), and
their native languages.  By assumption 10, this makes it an objective
language regime. DISCUSSION:  If all the native languages are official,
every group's adoption cost is 0, and one can make the language policy
fair without ascertaining adoption prices.  Result 4 further challenges
defenses of unfair language policies.  Objectivity, like efficiency, is
no bar to fairness in this model. RESULT 5.	There is no objective
language regime that always produces an efficient language policy.
PROOF:  Consider a 2-group polity with the native languages as the only
languages.  Let us use this notation: L	the set of official
languages; pi	the adoption price for group i of its nonnative
language if its native language is not official; c	the total cost.
Then L can be .  With , the only cost is an adoption cost, p2.  With ,
the only cost is an adoption cost, p1.  With , the only cost is the
translation cost, , which in this example, with , is .  Thus, To know
that a language policy is efficient in this case requires knowing
whether p2, p1, or s is smallest.  But no objective language regime has
access to p1 or p2.  Thus, no objective language regime can guarantee an
efficient language policy in this case or, consequently, in all cases.
DISCUSSION:  An objective language regime may identify some inefficient
language policies, but it can't identify all of them.  For example, any
policy that officializes all the groups' native languages and at least 1
other language must be inefficient.  But policies that officialize only
groups' native languages can't be classified as efficient or inefficient
without a knowledge of adoption prices. Under this model's assumptions,
it is wrong to claim, as is often done, that having many official
languages is necessarily inefficient.  As more native languages are made
official, translation costs rise but adoption costs fall.  If all
adoption prices are sufficiently large, it will be efficient to
officialize all the groups' native languages. Why, then, do people
assert that official multilingualism is inherently inefficient?  They
may assume that the cost of translation is efficiency-relevant but the
cost of language adoption is not.  In my model translation is paid for
centrally, while language adoption is paid for by the adopters, and in
many cases the facts seem to resemble this assumption.  The tendency to
regard multiple official languages as inefficient may, then, reflect a
state-centered neglect of costs incurred by individuals in adapting to
language policies. The search for an objective language regime that
reliably produces an efficient and fair language policy has failed. 
Such a regime can guarantee a fair but not an efficient language policy.
I appeal for help, then, to semiobjective language regimes, and at least
under some conditions they succeed.  In specifying the conditions of
success, I shall assume that a semiobjective language regime may force
any group, in any sequence, to choose among any set of alternatives and
may also recommend to any group any principle for making any choice.  I
shall further assume that each group follows some choice strategy, which
determines how the group chooses among any set of alternatives under any
conditions.  For the sake of analytical simplicity, I now define 2
special attributes that groups may have.  A group is completely informed
if it knows all relevant facts, including all adoption prices, all
previously made choices, all facts about the language regime, and all
facts about each group's choice strategy.  A group is deferentially
rational if its choice strategy is to make a choice that minimizes the
group's expected burden and, whenever 2 or more alternatives would be
equally burden-minimizing, to choose among those alternatives according
to any principle recommended to the group by the language regime. RESULT
6.	In a polity with 2 languages and 2 completely informed,
deferentially rational groups, at least 1 semiobjective language regime
always produces an efficient, fair language policy. PROOF:  My proof has
6 parts.  In part 1, I define a semiobjective language regime that
obtains sequential choices from groups.  In part 2, I show the language
policy that the regime produces, given any sequence of group choices. 
In parts 3-5, I show the choices that the groups make.  In part 6, I
show that the language policy is always efficient and fair. Part 1.  The
suspicious own-price-soliciting (SOPS) language regime is defined by the
following 8 steps, A-H. Choice solicitation.  (A) The groups are
arbitrarily numbered 1 and 2.  (B) Group 1 is instructed to choose a
positive number, and it is recommended that this number be the adoption
price for group 1 of language 2.  (C) Next, group 2 is instructed to
choose a positive number, and it is recommended that this number be the
adoption price for group 2 of language 1.  (D) Next, group 2 is
instructed to choose the word "one" or "two", and it is recommended that
this word be "one".  (E) Next, if the number chosen by group 1 (step B)
is greater than the number chosen by group 2 (step C) and no greater
than s, group 1's choice is discarded and group 1 is again instructed to
choose a positive number, and it is again recommended that this number
be the adoption price for group 1 of language 2.  (F) The primary
recommendations made in steps B, C, and E are supplemented by the
subordinate recommendation that the group choose the largest of the
numbers that it considers. Policy production.  (G) A language policy is
produced, and it is defined so as to be efficient and fair if the number
last chosen by each group is the adoption price for that group of its
nonnative language.  (H) If step G fails to specify a unique set of
official languages, {1} or {2} is officialized in preference to {1, 2},
and if {1} and {2} are tied the word chosen in step D names the official
language. Table 2.  Outcomes in a 2-language polity under a suspicious
own-price-soliciting language regime To refer to elements of this
language regime, I shall use the following terms.  A claim is a choice
made in step B, C, or E.  A claim is true if it obeys the primary
recommendation.  A disclosure is a nondiscarded claim.  The choice made
in step D and the disclosures are signals.  An apparent attribute of the
language policy is an attribute that it possesses when both disclosures
are true.  I shall also use the following symbols: q	the initial
claim of group 1; r	the revised claim, if any, of group 1; di	the
disclosure of group i; c'	the apparent total cost; a'i	the
apparent adoption cost of group i; a'	the sum of the apparent
adoption costs. Part 2.  Given any combination of signals, the SOPS
language regime produces an apparently efficient language policy.  In
other words, the language policy is efficient if both disclosures are
true, but may or may not be efficient otherwise.  Thus, the policy
minimizes the apparent total cost c', given by Equation 5 is equation 4
with the disclosures substituted for the respective adoption prices. 
Whichever of {d1, d2, s} is smallest, the regime makes the corresponding
language(s) official.  Any ties are broken as described in step H. The
SOPS language regime also produces an apparently fair language policy. 
Thus, the apparent burdens, a'i + xi, are proportional to group sizes. 
Adapting equation 3, we find that the apparently fair tax on group i is
A complete description of the language policies produced by the SOPS
language regime appears in table 2.  It classifies all the possible
combinations of signals into 3 mutually exclusive situations.  In each
situation, the language regime officializes a different set of
languages.  For each situation, table 2 specifies the taxes that will be
imposed on the groups.  The burdens shown in table 2 are the true-not
apparent-burdens that result from the language policies.  These burdens
will be used in later parts of the proof. Table 3.  Group 1's revised
claim in a 2-language polity under a suspicious own-price-soliciting
language regime Note:  A superscript "-" designates a quantity
infinitesimally smaller than the quantity to which it is appended. As an
illustration of how table 2 is derived, consider what happens if group
2's disclosure, d2, is smaller than group 1's disclosure, d1, and no
greater than s.  The language regime then officializes {1} (according to
equation 5).  The taxes it imposes are determined according to equation
6.  For example, the tax on group 2 is derived as follows: Part 3.  If
group 1's claim is resolicited, group 1 chooses a revised claim that
will minimize group 1's burden.  In determining how its revised claim
(r, which then becomes d1) will affect its burden, group 1 is completely
informed.  Thus, it knows how its burden will depend on d1, as shown in
table 2. A complete description of the revised claims made by group 1
appears in table 3.  This table applies under the condition described in
step E, namely when .  When this condition is met, then depending on
group 2's prior choices group 1 may be in any of 3 mutually exclusive
positions.  For each position, table 3 specifies group 1's revised
claim, together with the situation and burdens resulting from that
claim. It is a straightforward matter to derive r in table 3 from table
2.  For illustration, suppose  and , and suppose the word is "one".  The
former inequality causes group 1's claim to be resolicited.  The latter
inequality puts group 1 into position I.  Table 3 says that group 1's
rational revised claim is then true , leading to situation and giving
group 1 a burden of .  Situation emerges from this revised claim because
, and these inequalities satisfy the definition of situation in table 2.
 Now consider why it is rational for group 1 to tell the truth in
position I.  Suppose group 1 lied by making .  Then situation _ would
still emerge (because the definition of that situation in table 2 would
remain satisfied), and group 1's burden would not change (because it is
not a function of r).  Now suppose group 1 lied by making .  Then
situation  would emerge (because  would be satisfied), and group 1's
burden would become .  This burden would be an increase, as shown by
Table 4.  Group 2's signal in a 2-language polity under a suspicious
own-price-soliciting language regime Thus, under the conditions of this
illustration group 1 minimizes its burden by telling the truth.  It
would equally minimize its burden by telling some lies, but it is
deferentially rational, so when breaking ties it tells the truth,
obeying the primary recommendation in step E.  Similar arguments lead to
the conclusions of table 3 about all other possible cases in which group
1's claim is resolicited. Part 4.  Group 2 knows how its burden will
depend on the choices it makes.  Thus, it knows that if q > s no choices
by group 2 can cause group 1's claim to be resolicited, but if  group 2
will cause the resolicitation of group 1's claim by making .  In either
case, group 2 can use tables 2 and 3 to predict the effect of its
choices on its own burden.  Given this complete information, group 2's
choices are shown in table 4. The possible initial claims of group 1 can
put group 2 into any of the 5 mutually exclusive cases in table 4. 
Since it is not immediately obvious that these cases are exhaustive and
mutually exclusive, a more transparent but logically equivalent diagram
of the cases is presented in figure 1.  For each case, table 4 shows
group 2's signals, including its disclosure (d2) and the word it
chooses.  The table also shows the position into which these signals put
group 1 (in table 3), if relevant, and the situation and burdens that
result. To verify table 4's predictions, one can use tables 2 and 3 to
determine whether group 2 could obtain a smaller burden by giving any
signal other than the predicted one.  I shall summarize this
verification for case 1.  In case 1, table 4 predicts that group 2 will
choose the word "two", and also that group 2's disclosure will be a lie.
 Instead of truthfully making , group 2 will falsely make .  This
disclosure must be false, because , as shown by Figure 1.  Alternative
representation of case definitions in table 4 When we consider group 2's
alternative signals, we find that they all increase group 2's burden,
compared with the predicted signals.  Suppose group 2 made .  This would
directly produce situation  , and group 2's burden would increase from
p1 to q.  Suppose group 2 made .  This would leave group 1 still in
position II, but group 2's resulting burden would be d2, again greater
than before.  Suppose group 2 made .  This would move group 1 into
position I and give group 2 a burden of . This would be an increased
burden, as shown by Now suppose group 2 changed "two" to "one" and kept
.  This would move group 1 into position I and make group 2's burden ,
which inequality 10 shows would be an increase.  Changing "two" to "one"
and making  would directly produce situation   and give group 2 a burden
of , which would also be an increase because Table 5.  Group 1's signal
in a 2-language polity under a suspicious own-price-soliciting language
regime Changing "two" to "one" and making  would move group 1 into
position III and give group 2 a burden of d, an obvious increase over
p1.  Changing "two" to "one" and changing d2 in any other way would have
the same effects as the corresponding changes of d2 without changing the
word.  Thus, every possible pair of signals by group 2 other than  and
the word "two" would increase group 2's burden, making these signals
uniquely burden-minimizing.  Similar reasoning gives the conclusions of
table 4 for cases 2-5. Part 5.  The initial choice by group 1
anticipates the responses shown in table 4.  The relative magnitudes of
p1, p2, and s can put group 1 into any of the 4 mutually exclusive
states, shown in table 5, which also shows for each state the choice (q)
that group 1 makes and the resulting set of official languages, burdens,
and total cost (c). As in parts 2-4, I shall demonstrate the rationality
of the predicted choice for a single example, this one defined by . 
Under these conditions, group 1 is in state A, and table 5 predicts
group 1's disclosure will be a lie, with  instead of .  This disclosure
puts group 2 into case 2 (in table 4) and makes group 1's burden p2.  If
instead group 1 made q > s, group 2 would be moved into case 3, and
group 1's burden would change to s1, which would be an increase since . 
If group 1 made , group 2 would still be in case 2, but group 1's burden
would increase to q.  Finally, making  would move group 2 into case 4
and give group 1 a burden of .  This would be an increased burden, since
Thus, all of the possible alternatives to the predicted choice would
increase the burden on group 1. Part 6.  Through parts 2-5 we know, for
any possible set {p1, p2, s}, what choices the groups will make and what
policy the language regime will produce.  Table 5 shows that the
language policy is always efficient and fair.  The set of official
languages achieves a total cost, c, equal to the smallest of {p1, p2,
s}, making the language policy efficient.  And in each of the 4 states
the groups' burdens are proportional to their sizes (s1 and s2), making
the policy fair.  The proof is now complete. DISCUSSION:  At least under
some conditions, specifically when there are 2 completely informed and
deferentially rational groups and 2 languages, a semiobjective language
regime can produce a language policy that is guaranteed to be both
efficient and fair.  The language regime uses choices by the groups to
infer adoption prices, and it bases its language policy on these
inferences. A semiobjective language regime that achieves efficiency and
fairness is valuable because, by assumption, the policymaker can't
observe true adoption prices.  Superficially, it might seem artificial
to deny this information to the policymaker when result 6 assumes the
groups know one another's adpotion prices.  But it would be naive to
suppose that mere knowledge of true adoption prices by policymakers
suffices to motivate the adoption of efficient and fair policies.  The
policymaker may privately know the adoption prices, but because this
knowledge isn't publicly verifiable any invocation of any adoption price
by the policymaker to justify any language policy can be contested by
some group.  Conversely, if the policymaker is motivated to benefit some
group at some other group's expense and thus knowingly bases the
language policy on false adoption prices, no victimized group can
demonstrate that the true adoption prices justify a different language
policy.  My model's assumption of policymaker ignorance, then, can best
be interpreted as mistrust in the impartiality of the policymaker. 
Given this mistrust, I have asked whether rules can be designed that
will produce efficient and fair language policies, thereby eliminating
the need to rely on the discretion of potentially biased policymakers.
Why not, then, design the simplest possible semiobjective language
regime?  Why not just ask each group what its adoption price is and
trust each group to tell the truth?  The answer is that under conditions
where a more complex language regime works such a simple language regime
does not work.  Although I shall not present the proof here, under the
same conditions as defined in result 6, if one simply trusts each group
to disclose its own adoption price the groups are not always truthful,
and fairness is not always achieved.  Specifically, when the efficient
language policy would officialize the native language of group 2, and
group 1 is the first one to be asked to disclose its adoption price, it
overstates its adoption price (without overstating it so much as to make
a different set of official languages appear efficient).  Group 2
responds to this lie by telling the truth, because it can't benefit by
lying.  The efficient language is officialized, but the taxes are based
on the falsely inflated adoption price of group 1, so group 1's
per-capita burden is smaller than group 2's, making the language policy
unfair. Given this defect in a trusting language regime, one could still
rely on it if it were possible to know that the first group to disclose
its adoption price is the group with the larger adoption price.  In
practice, one can plausibly guess that this is true of the larger group.
 The motivation for this guess is that adoption prices are aggregates of
individually incurred costs and are thus proportional to group size,
except for any systematic intergroup differences.  Further, it seems
that minority members usually learn majority languages more willingly
and easily (through exposure) than vice versa, so intergroup differences
would tend to support the guess that the larger group's adoption price
is larger.  In many countries, language groups differ greatly in size. 
According to Rustow's (1968) compilation the largest native language is
at least 2 times as large as the next-largest in 80% of all countries. 
Thus, one can hope to inhibit unfairness by soliciting the larger
group's disclosure first. But it is precisely in countries with
similarly-sized language groups-or with groups whose languages, despite
small size, are plausible candidates for official status-where the cost
measurement problem is salient and a self-executing rule might be
desired.  Thus, elegance and practicality both argue for a redesign of
the language regime to preserve fairness against false disclosures,
without requiring a guess as to the rank order of adoption costs. As
result 6 has shown, an element of suspicion built into the language
regime eliminates the advantage that the first-asked group can gain from
lying.  In effect, it gives group 2 an opportunity to call group 1's
bluff when group 1 would otherwise gain an advantage from lying. 
Knowing that its bluff can be called, group 1 finds it rational not to
lie, so its bluff never needs to get called.  The suspicious
own-price-soliciting (SOPS) language regime doesn't eliminate all lying,
but eliminates lying when lying would make the language policy unfair.
The lying that remains under the SOPS language regime actually protects
fairness, rather than undermining it.  Under this regime, it is rational
for group 1 to lie when an efficient language policy would officialize
group 1's native language.  Group 1 then understates its adoption price.
 This lie prevents group 2 from gaining an unfair advantage by
overstating group 2's adoption price.  Group 1's lie keeps group 2
honest.  Since language 1 is the one that becomes official, only group
2's (true) disclosure of its adoption price is used in determining the
taxes.  Therefore, group 1's lie does not mislead the language regime
into producing an unfair language policy.  A fairness-irrelevant lie by
one group induces the other group to disclose a fairness-relevant truth.
Figure 2 illustrates the groups' responses to the SOPS language regime. 
Under 4 out of the 6 conditions shown, both groups' disclosures are
identical to their adoption prices.  Under 2 conditions (in state A),
group 1 pretends its adoption price is the same as it knows group 2's to
be, so group 2 will have no incentive to pretend its adoption price is
larger than it truly is. Conclusion My model of a linguistically
heterogeneous polity yields reassuring results about the possibility of
an efficient and fair language policy.  A language policy consisting of
a set of official languages and a schedule of taxes on language groups
can always be made both efficient (total-cost-minimizing) and fair
(individual-burden-equalizing).  Furthermore, one can specify a rule
that produces a fair (though not efficient) language policy without
depending on information about the cost that any choice of official
languages would impose on any language group.  Finally, if we are
willing to let 2 rational groups give us claims as to the costs they
would suffer as a result of official status being denied to their own
languages, we can specify a rule that produces an efficient and fair
language policy.  An appropriate revelation procedure can be designed so
that any misrepresentation of cost will, rather than preventing an
efficient and fair official language policy, actually secure it. Figure
2.  Signals and resulting official languages in a 2-language polity
under a suspicious own-price-soliciting language regime

	Note:  p1, p2, or s is the true total cost if {2}, {1}, or {1, 2},
respectively, is the set of official languages.  The policymaker knows
only s.  Group i signals a value for pi.  If apparent minimum total
costs are tied, language signaled by group 2 is officialized. Questions
about the robustness of my results are appropriate.  One kind of
question is whether the extremity of my assumptions has led to results
qualitatively different from those that moderate assumptions would have
produced.  Most obviously, suppose I had allowed imperfections in the
rationality and in the complete information of the language groups. 
Would result 6 have been fundamentally different?  I believe it would
have changed only incrementally.  Consider state A, as shown in figure
2.  Here, group 1 understates its adoption price, matching the known
true adoption price of group 2.  Group 2 then truthfully discloses its
adoption price.  Group 1's language is made official.  As a precise
empirical prediction, this result is implausible, because of
imperfections in information and rationality.  If group 1 slightly
underestimated group 2's adoption price, group 1 would unknowingly
undercut it, and group 2 would then rationally tell the truth and let
the language regime make language 2 the only official language.  This
could cause group 1 great damage, for its true adoption cost would be p1
while its compensation would be based on its disclosed price below p2. 
What, then, would happen if the model were amended to include reasonable
assumptions about uncertainty and miscalculation?  Presumably, in state
A group 1 would not precisely match its belief about p2 when it chose a
disclosure.  Instead, group 1 would allow a margin for error and
disclose a price somewhat above p2, whereupon group 2 would disclose an
adoption price between group 1's disclosure and the true p2.  The
language regime would still officialize language 1.  The language policy
would still be efficient, and it would be almost fair, only slightly
advantaging group 2.  Thus, my results appear not unduly sensitive to
relaxations in the groups' information and rationality. Another kind of
question is whether I have omitted fundamental aspects of official
language politics from this model.  Indeed, I have, and some realistic
complications, reflecting known typical features of language politics,
deserve inclusion in subsequent models.  For example, compensatory
differences in tax rates among language groups, used in my model to
achieve a fair language policy, would in fact probably lead some native
speakers of official languages to attempt to misrepresent their
language-group membership.  Such misrepresentation has been observed in
India, Quebec, and elsewhere; it could be included in a more elaborate
model.  In addition, official languages, especially when made obligatory
media of instruction in schools, can influence intergenerational
assimilation.  A model that incorporated assimilation would permit one
to deal with issues of intergenerational fairness and the value of
intergenerational linguistic continuity.  Other models could permit
defection of groups from the polity or could give citizens a choice
whether to learn an official language.  The groups could be assumed to
have incomplete information about one another's adoption prices. 
Translation cost could vary depending on the languages.  Discounting
could be introduced to represent the up-front cost of language learning
versus the ongoing cost of translation.  New policy norms such as
language diversity could be added.  Individuals' adoption prices and
nonlinguistic policy interests could differ within groups.  The official
statuses of languages could be permitted to be qualitatively
differentiated (e.g., "official", "working") or spatially distributed
(e.g., "national", "regional"). While inviting such extensions, I point
out that even the present model is complex when compared to those
implicit in prior work.  The proto-models of official language choice
that I have answered here have simply ignored the possibility of
nonlinguistic compensation for the inequalities produced by official
languages.  When addressing the impacts of language policies on
population groups, the authors have not analyzed the problem of
incentives to misrepresent one's costs.  Of course, observers of
language politics in particular places usually describe trade-offs and
deceptions, but we are yet far from making good use of their insights in
enriching the general theory of language choice. Notes Numerous
individuals have commented helpfully on prior drafts of this article.  I
particularly acknowledge the comments of Paul R. Brass, Lisa Ciccanti,
Carol M. Eastman, Roy A. Gardner, Walton Graham, David D. Laitin,
Barbara Lyon, Peter J. May, Donald J. McCrone, Brian McFann, Peter H.
Rohn, Joel Sobel, Selma K. Sonntag, and John Wilkerson (in alphabetical
order), as well as the special inspirations of Ithiel de Sola Pool,
Duncan MacRae, Jr., and Reinhard Selten (in chronological order). 
Support for this research was received from Zentrum für
interdisziplinäre Forschung der Universität Bielefeld, the Faculty
Research Programme of the Embassy of Canada to the United States, and
the University of Washington. References Anderson, Barbara A., and Brian
D. Silver.  1984.  "Equality, Efficiency, and Politics in Soviet
Bilingual Education Policy, 1934-1980."  American Political Science
Review 78:1019-39. Andronov, M. S.  1975.  "Problems of the National
Language in Tamilnad."  Anthropos 70:180-93. Atkins, J. D. C. 
1887/1978.  "The English Language in Indian Schools."  Ch. 27.  In
Americanizing the American Indians, ed. Francis Paul Prucha.  Lincoln,
NB:  University of Nebraska Press, pp. 197-206. Avrorin, V. A.  1975. 
Problemy izu_enija funkcional'noj storony jazyka [Problems in the study
of the functional aspect of language].  Leningrad:  Nauka. Beer, William
R., and James E. Jacob, eds.  1985.  Language Policy and National Unity.
 Totowa, NJ:  Rowman and Allanheld. Brass, Paul R.  1974.  Language,
Religion and Politics in North India.  New York:  Cambridge University
Press. Britannica Book of the Year [serial]. Canada.  Commissioner of
Official Languages.  1989.  Annual Report, 1988.  Ottawa:  Minister of
Supply and Services Canada. Coulmas, Florian.  1985.  Sprache und Staat
[Language and State].  Berlin:  Walter de Gruyter. Das Gupta,
Jyotirindra.  1970.  Language Conflict and National Development. 
Berkeley:  University of California Press. Dasgupta, Partha, Peter
Hammond, and Eric Maskin.  1979.  "The Implementation of Social Choice
Rules:  Some General Results on Incentive Compatibility."  Review of
Economic Studies 46:185-216. De Witte, Bruno.  1989.  "Droits
fondamentaux et protection de la diversité linguistique" [Fundamental
rights and the protection of linguistic diversity].  In Langue et droit
[Language and law], ed. Paul Pupier and José Woehrling.  Montréal: 
Wilson and Lafleur, pp. 85-101. DeFrancis, John.  1977.  Colonialism and
Language Policy in Viet Nam.  The Hague:  Mouton. Deeriev, Ju. D.  1977.
 Social'naja lingvistika [Sociolinguistics].  Moscow:  Nauka. Deutsch,
Karl W.  1984.  "Space and Freedom:  Conditions for the Temporary
Separation of Incompatible Groups."  International Political Science
Review 5:125-38. Falch, Jean.  1973.  Contribution à l'étude du statut
des langues en Europe [A study of the legal status of languages in
Europe].  Québec:  Centre international de recherche sur le bilinguisme.
Fishman, Joshua A.  1973.  Language and Nationalism.  Cambridge, MA: 
Newbury House. Fishman, Joshua A.  1973/1974.  "Language Modernization
and Planning in Comparison with Other Types of National Modernization
and Planning."  In Advances in Language Planning, ed. Joshua A. Fishman.
 The Hague:  Mouton, pp. 79-102. Fishman, Joshua A., ed.  1986. 
Language Rights and the English Language Amendment.  Issue 60 of
International Journal of the Sociology of Language. Green, Leslie. 
1987.  "Are Language Rights Fundamental?"  Osgoode Hall Law Journal
25:639-69. Guboglo, M. N.  1979.  "Jazyk edinstva i edinstvo jazykov"
[Language of unity and unity of languages].  In Aktual'nye problemy
nacional'nyx otno_enij v svete novoj konstitucii SSSR [Current problems
of nationality relations in light of the new constitution of the USSR],
ed. Ju. V. Bromlej et al.  Moscow:  Institut istorii SSSR AN SSSR, pp.
187-202. Haugen, Einar.  1966.  Language Conflict and Language Planning:
 The Case of Modern Norwegian.  Cambridge, MA:  Harvard University
Press. Isaev, M. I. [Isayev, M. I.].  1977.  National Languages in the
USSR:  Problems and Solutions.  Moscow:  Progress. Kelman, Herbert C. 
1971.  "Language as an Aid and Barrier to Involvement in the National
System."  Ch. 2.  In Can Language Be Planned?, ed. Joan Rubin and Björn
H. Jernudd.  Honolulu:  University of Hawaii Press, pp. 21-51. King, C.
E.  1977.  The Implications of Additional Languages in the United
Nations System.  New York:  United Nations.  A/32/237. Kloss, Heinz. 
1966.  "Types of Multilingual Communities:  A Discussion of Ten
Variables."  In Explorations in Sociolinguistics, ed. Stanley Lieberson.
 Bloomington, IN:  Indiana University, pp. 7-17. Laitin, David D.  1977.
 Politics, Language, and Thought:  The Somali Experience.  Chicago: 
University of Chicago Press. Laitin, David D.  1989.  "Language Policy
and Political Strategy in India."  Policy Sciences 22:415-36. Laponce,
Jean A.  1984.  Langue et territoire [Language and territory].  Québec: 
Les presses de l'Université Laval. Laponce, Jean A.  1989. 
"L'aménagement linguistique et les effets pervers" [Language planning
and side effects].  In Langue et droit [Language and law], ed. Paul
Pupier and José Woehrling.  Montréal:  Wilson and Lafleur, pp. 35-43.
Laqueur, Walter, and Barry Rubin, eds.  1979.  The Human Rights Reader. 
New York:  New American Library. Lau v. Nichols.  1974.  414 U.S.
563-72. Mackey, William F.  1977.  "La planification linguistique au
Canada:  politiques et applications:  introduction" [Language planning
in Canada:  principles and applications:  introduction].  Ch. 9.  In The
Individual, Language and Society in Canada, ed. W. H. Coons, Donald M.
Taylor, and Marc-Adélard Tremblay.  Ottawa:  Canada Council, pp. 337-61.
Mazrui, Ali A.  1976.  A World Federation of Cultures:  An African
Perspective.  New York:  Free Press. McRae, Kenneth D.  1983.  Conflict
and Compromise in Multilingual Societies: Switzerland.  Waterloo,
Ontario:  Wilfred Laurier University Press. McRae, Kenneth D.  1986. 
Conflict and Compromise in Multilingual Societies: Belgium.  Waterloo,
Ontario:  Wilfred Laurier University Press. Muñiz-Argüelles, Luis. 
1989.  "The Status of Languages in Puerto Rico."  In Langue et droit
[Language and Law], ed. Paul Pupier and José Woehrling.  Montréal: 
Wilson and Lafleur, pp. 457-72. Noss, Richard.  1967.  Language Policy
and Higher Education.  Paris:  Unesco and International Association of
Universities. O'Barr, William M.  1976.  "The Study of Language and
Politics."  In Language and Politics, ed. William M. O'Barr and Jean F.
O'Barr.  The Hague:  Mouton, pp. 1-27. O'Barr, William M., and Jean F.
O'Barr, eds.  1976.  Language and Politics.  The Hague:  Mouton.
Ostrower, Alexander.  1965.  Language, Law and Diplomacy.  Philadelphia:
 University of Pennsylvania Press. Polomé, Edgar.  1968.  "The Choice of
Official Languages in the Democratic Republic of the Congo."  In
Language Problems of Developing Nations, ed. Joshua A. Fishman, Charles
A. Ferguson, and Jyotirindra Das Gupta.  New York:  Wiley, pp. 295-311.
Pool, Jonathan.  1976.  "Developing the Soviet Turkic Tongues:  The
Language of the Politics of Language."  Slavic review 35:425-42. Pool,
Jonathan.  1978.  "Soviet Language Planning:  Goals, Results, Options. 
Ch. 7.  In Soviet Nationality Policies and Practices, ed. Jeremy R.
Azrael.  New York:  Praeger, pp. 223-249. Pool, Jonathan.  1987. 
"Thinking about Linguistic Discrimination."  Language Problems and
Language Planning 11:3-21. Rabushka, Alvin, and Kenneth A. Shepsle. 
1972.  Politics in Plural Societies:  A Theory of Democratic
Instability.  Columbus:  Merrill. Radner, Roy.  1986.  "Information
Pooling and Decentralized Decision Making.  In Information Pooling and
Group Decision Making, ed. Bernard Grofman and Guillermo Owen. 
Greenwich, CT:  JAI, pp. 195-217. Rasmusen, Eric.  1989.  Games and
Information.  Oxford, U.K.:  Basil Blackwell. Rubango, Nyunda ya.  1986.
 "Le français au Zaïre:  langue 'supérieure' et chances de 'survie' dans
un pays africain" [French in Zaire:  "superior" language and "survival"
chances in an African country].  Language Problems and Language Planning
10:253-71. Rubin, Joan.  1984.  "Planning for Language Change in the
United States:  The Case of Monolingual Spanish Speakers."  Ch. 8.  In
Language and Power, ed. Cheris Kramarae, Muriel Schulz, and William M.
O'Barr.  Newbury Park, CA:  Sage, pp. 154-75. Rustow, Dankwart A.  1968.
 "Language, Modernization, and Nationhood-An Attempt at Typology."  In
Language Problems of Developing Nations, ed. Joshua A. Fishman, Charles
A. Ferguson, and Jyotirindra Das Gupta.  New York:  Wiley, pp. 87-105.
Rustow, Dankwart A.  1970.  "Transitions to Democracy:  Toward a Dynamic
Model."  Comparative Politics 2:337-63. Schiffman, Harold.  1987. 
"Losing the Battle for Balanced Bilingualism:  The German-American
Case."  Language Problems and Language Planning 11:66-81. Sniderman,
Paul M., Joseph F. Fletcher, Peter H. Russell, and Philip E. Tetlock. 
1989.  "Political Culture and the Problem of Double Standards: Mass and
Elite Attitudes toward Language Rights in the Canadian Charter of Rights
and Freedoms."  Canadian Journal of Political Science 22:259-84.
Spencer, Gregory.  1986.  Projections of the Hispanic Population:  1983
to 2080 (Current Population Reports, P-25, no. 995).  Washington:  U.S.
Bureau of the Census. Strategy Research Corporation.  1987.  1987 U.S.
Hispanic Market Study.  Miami:  the author. Tabory, Mala.  1980. 
Multilingualism in International Law and Institutions.  Rockville, MD: 
Sijthoff and Noordhoff. Thorburn, Thomas.  1971.  "Cost-Benefit Analysis
in Language Planning."  Ch. 13.  In Can Language Be Planned?, ed. Joan
Rubin and Björn H. Jernudd.  Honolulu:  University of Hawaii Press, pp.
253-62. Tollefson, James W.  1986.  "Language Policy and the Radical
Left in the Philippines:  The New People's Army and its Antecedents." 
Language Problems and Language Planning 10:177-89. Vaillancourt,
François.  1983.  "The Economics of Language and Language Planning." 
Language Problems and Language Planning 7:162-78. Van Dyke, Vernon. 
1976.  "Human Rights without Distinction as to Language."  International
Studies Quarterly 20:3-38. Vikör, Lars S.  1988.  Språkplanlegging: 
prinsipp og praksis [Language planning:  theory and practice].  Oslo: 
Novus. Weinstein, Brian.  1983.  The Civic Tongue:  Political
Consequences of Language Choices.  New York:  Longman. Weinstein, Brian,
ed.  1990.  Language Policy and Political Development.  Norwood, NJ: 
Ablex. Whiteley, Wilfred J.  1971/1974.  "Language Policies of
Independent African States."  In Advances in Language Planning, ed.
Joshua A. Fishman.  The Hague:  Mouton, pp. 177-89. Woolard, Kathryn A. 
1989.  "Sentences in the Language Prison:  The Rhetorical Structuring of
an American Language Policy Debate."  American Ethnologist 16:268-78.
Wurm, Stephen A.  1974.  "Language Policy, Language Engineering and
Literacy in New Guinea and Australia."  In Advances in Language
Planning, ed. Joshua A. Fishman.  The Hague:  Mouton, pp. 205-220.
Young, Crawford.  1976.  The Politics of Cultural Pluralism.  Madison,
WI:  University of Wisconsin Press. The Official Language Problem
